---
layout: post
title: "Evaluating Terrorism in Contemporary Irish Literature"
date: 2008-03-03
---
Understanding Ireland as a nation torn by the influence of colonialism provides an essential backdrop to the conflict that occurred during most of the twentieth century between a Protestant Ireland and a Catholic Ireland. This violent, political conflict emerged partly as a result of a national identity crisis in which the nation was left divided both ideologically and geographically. Ideologically the nationalists who represented the Catholic Irish population fought for an independent Ireland whereas the unionists who represented the Protestant population supported a British influence in the country. Ireland also became geographically polarized in the sense that the Protestant influence was confined to the northern regions of Ireland whereas the Catholic influence remained strong in southern Ireland.

Defining this violent conflict that occurred during the greater part of the twentieth century in Ireland has often been the sense of terror and level atrocities associated with the bitter hostility between the two Irelands. The concept of terrorism was strongly contextualized by the nature of the conflict in Ireland; both sides sought to use violence as a means of propagating their political agendas. I have chosen to analyze the representation of terrorism, the figure of the terrorist, and the legacies of this violent political conflict in two pieces of contemporary Irish literature. 
In order to understand the representation of terrorism it is important to understand the two types of terrorism that emerged during the period after the War of Independence. Yonah Alexander defines these two types of terrorism the first being "violence emanating from national, ethnic or religious groups attempting to regain territory, establish rights, create a state or expel rival religious or racial peoples" and the second being a "State-sponsored terrorism" (Alexander, 1991). Both sides were equally brutal and both sought to gain political power over the other.
These representations of terrorism in Irish contemporary literature often serve as a backdrop theme in which the author places an emphasis on the historical context of the book within this backdrop of an internal conflict. This conflict "arises from the relatively recent erection of national boundaries in Ireland" (O'Day, 1995).

The first example of this theme can be seen in William Trevor's The Story of Lucy Gault. The Gault family is a Protestant family who live in southern Ireland so they are a minority. The story starts around the time of the War of Independence, "Captain Everard Gault wounded the boy in the right shoulder on the night of June the twenty-first, nineteen twenty-one. Aiming above the trespassers' heads in the darkness, he fired the single shot from an upstairs window and then watched the three figures scuttling off, the wounded one assisted by his companions. They had come to fire the house, their visit expected because they had been before. On that occasion they had come later, in the early morning, just after one. The sheepdogs had seen them off, but within a week the dogs lay poisoned in the yard and Captain Gault knew they would be back (Trevor, 2002)." The opening scene of the book does not hesitate to describe the level of intensity of the conflict and sets up the book within the framework of violence. As a result the Gault family is torn apart by the fear of this ever present possibility that they might fall victim to the political violence. This scene also reflects the figure of a terrorist as something mostly indefinable, figures of trespassers, people without faces, all of these images presented in this opening scene lead us to believe that the nature of the fear created by the figure of the terrorist is largely attributed to his anonymity.

The image of the terrorist, the young arsonist, is then deconstructed throughout the story, the character, Horahan, becomes haunted by the same terror that he had helped to establish and is ultimately committed to an asylum. When Captain Gault returns after fleeing Ireland Horahan feels the need to confess what happened on that night to "bring the torment to an end" (Trevor, 2002). The story of Horahan seems to illustrate the figure of the terrorist as someone who feels equally terrified by the situation. Horahan seeks to reconcile with Captain Gault their shared history of violence.

In a way The Story of Lucy Gault attempts to share the responsibility of what happened in Ireland and not place blame on one side or the other but hopefully illustrate that the idea of terrorism and the terrorists can be seen on both sides as particularly haunting. For this reason it can be said that "terrorism generally and Irish violence in particular have been notoriously difficult to define with precision." So to represent terrorism or the figure of a terrorist is of subject to the perspective of those involved, "those engaged in violence often deny the applicability of the label and assert that they are guerrilla or freedom fighters" (Alexander, 1991).

In the second example in Seamus Deane's Reading in the Dark you are introduced to the other side of this conflict. The narrator belongs to a Catholic family who live in Derry a city in the Protestant northern part of Ireland. A lot of the violence represented within story as State-sponsored terrorism. In one particular instance the Police raid the house of the Catholic family in search of a gun: "Where was the gun? I had had it, I had been seen with it, where was it? Policemen with huge face bent down to ask me, quietly at first, then more and more loudly. They made my father sit at a table and then lean over it, with his arm outspread. Then they beat him on the neck and shoulders with rubber truncheons, short and gorged-red in colour. He told them, but they didn't believe him. So they beat us too, Liam and me, across the table from him. I remember the sweat and rage on his face as he looked" (Deane, 1996). Terrorism is represented as the abuse of power from within the State as a means of forwarding a political agenda. The Police create a constant fear amongst the Catholic minority in an attempt to suppress the nationalistic tendencies.

The level of violence can be seen in the story of Neil McLaughlin. "McLaughlin died on the street where he had been shot coming out of the newspaper office where he worked." He was killed for no apparent reason by "a drunken policeman with a gun, looking for a Catholic to kill, and he left that man's wife and two young children and would have got off scot-free for the rest of his days; probably got promoted for sterling service" (Deane, 1996). This random act of violence similarly characterized in the arsonists' attempt to burn the Gault's house in The Story of Lucy Gault is characteristic of the level of violence and terrorism that occurred within Ireland.

Another component of the representation of terrorism is the sense of honour that is attributed to fighting against an oppressive force. As Alan O'Day points out "political violence has an extended and, for many people, and honourable history in Ireland. Nationalists have seen resistance to British rule as heroic" and Unionists have seen "resisting the yoke of Dublin" as a cause for a continuation of their political agenda. "No side, however, praised violence for its own sake; none attempted to defend intentional terrorism directed at civilians, especially when aimed at women and children. Political violence may have been a feature in the quest for national independence but it did not extend to genocide" (O'Day, 1995).

The legacy of terrorism in Ireland and the greater conflict continued to divide the nation through violence. Deane characterizes not only the initial terror of the internal conflict immediately following the War of Independence but he takes the story right up to the 1970's where there is a constant barrage of violence resulting from the frustration groups like IRA. "We choked on CS gas fired by the army, saw or heard the explosions, the gunfire, the riots moving in close with their scrambled noises of glass breaking, petrol-bomb flashings, isolated shouts turning to a prolonged baying and the drilled smashing of batons on riot shields." People were living in a battlefield, "watching and listening to the war outside" (Deane, 1996).

The underlying issue seems to stem from the definition by which both sides attempt to circumvent the responsibility of their terrorism. "The refusal in early 1994 of an Irish court to extradite a man accused of murdering a solider in Derby on the basis that the crime was 'political' as it did not threaten civilians but was narrowly targeted to the victim illustrates the continuing problem" (O'Day, 1995). The representations of terrorism and its legacies have not faded from Ireland and as such it is hard to say whether or not this history will be revisited.

Only up until recently and within the past two decades have we seen a decline in the political violence surrounding the conflict between the various factions of the unionist and nationalist supporters. In the still divided Ireland "the long unprecedented conflict has left many bitter legacies" and there is a notion that perhaps "no solution can command the assent of all factions" but hope remains that the current resolve within the country might continue (O'Day, 1995). Many of the characters in both Reading in the Dark and The Story of Lucy Gault are haunted by the mistakes of the past as a result of the violent context of those decisions, which essentially destroyed the lives of individuals and families. In the end it seems as though "only passing time...could settle all this confusion" (Trevor, 2002).

The representations of terrorism and the figure of the terrorist remain largely undefined in that both sides share the casualties of conflict. It is hard to say whether one representation of terrorism has more validity than the other be it from a "national, ethnic, or religious group" or a State-sponsored terrorism. The legacies of the violent conflict in Ireland serve as a reminder of the nature of such conflicts and the nature of terrorism and the terrorist as a product of fear.

### Works Cited
* Alexander, Yonah (1991). The Irish Terrorism Experience. Hampshire, England: Dartmouth.
* Deane, Seamus (1996). Reading in the Dark. London: Vintage Books.
* O'Day, Alan (1995). Terrorism's Laboratory . Hampshire, England: Dartmouth.
* Trevor, William (2002). The Story of Lucy Gault. London: Penguin Books.
